welcome to topcast and to part three of
things that make you go hmm my
exploration of
[Music]
thematics morality
multiverses as this one will be about
metaphysics and many other things that
are covered in the conversation between
Max tegmark and Sam Harris that's what I
keep saying it's a wonderful
conversation go looking online for the
podcast if you sign up as a member of
Sam's Community then you get access to
the entire podcast which is what I've
got access to or you can buy the book of
conversations which includes the
conversations with David Deutsch that's
part one of the book and there's an
audio version of it and Max tag Mark as
well which is the very last part of the
book so as I said before two great
thinkers to begin and end a journey
through the making sense Series today
this one is about multiverses now I've
got an entire series online about the
Multiverse the Multiverse as I
understand it what we know exists is
what is known as the everettian
Multiverse the quantum Multiverse the
Multiverse that is explained in the
fabric of of reality and the beginning
of infinity that Quantum physicists talk
about so it is said an interpretation of
quantum theory we don't regard it as an
interpretation any more than one would
say dinosaurs are an interpretation of
fossils in a sense they are but there is
no other viable interpretation now of
course many physicists many Quantum
physicists will disagree with this kind
of thing and say oh no they don't
endorse the Multiverse now sometimes
this means they're an instrumentalist in
which case they're not endorsing any
particular interpretation they are
retreating from interpretations full
stop and hence explanations full stop
they're only interested in predictions
so they say so they claim and I would
just say of that it's completely
irrational because you need to
understand what you're doing
hahaha
simply being able to predict the outcome
of experiments is not understanding and
explaining reality and even if we don't
have a perfect explanation of reality
your job as a scientist should be at
least in part two try and understand
reality to give us the best explanation
that's one thing others to deny the
reality of the Multiverse and try and
come up with their own version what they
end up doing when you look at the
details something like boom's pilot wave
theory I've read quite a few
interpretations over my time Paul Davies
has that wonderful book ghost in the
atom where he goes through a large
number of interpretations there's been a
few popular science books written
recently who I think they get written
every other year about you know some
physicist pet favorite interpretation
one they've made up well these all fall
into two categories they're either going
to be of the instrumentalist Bands where
they're just denying that you can have a
proper interpretation and so just
calculate that's one way the popular
scientists do it and the physicists and
the other is just to disguise the
Multiverse in some way shape or form
it's the Multiverse in heavy disguise as
David Deutsch likes to say what happens
is they postulate the existence of
things you can't observe in other words
physical reality the reality we inhabit
in the reality we have access to in a
sense directly is being impinged upon by
other entities in reality that we can't
observe so these other entities in
reality although these physicists and
these popularizers of science might say
things like I don't endorse the
Multiverse I think that's a
proliferation of universes it violates
Occam's razor or it's just crazy
metaphysics or whatever nonetheless
their own interpretation tends to invoke
the existence of stuff you don't have
experimental access to in quite the same
way you have to infer its existence and
all we say about that is well yeah
you're inferring the existence of stuff
okay that other stuff it occupies a
different space it's not here now but
it's having an effect on the stuff you
do observe the stuff you do see you're
explaining why you get interference
effects because something's affecting
the path of those photons of those
electrons or those particles something
that you can't see but you're saying it
really exists that's the Multiverse now
you to call it whatever else you like
you can call those other things by
Christian names if you prefer but the
fact is they exist you're saying that
other stuff exists and that's what we
say the multiverses now we have a richer
explanation a coherent explanation that
just says well for each particle you do
observe there are counterparts of that
particle fungible instances which can
differentiate themselves and thereby
cause interference so whatever the case
this is the everettian Multiverse which
as I say it's unusual in that Max
tegmark does endorse a version of this a
version of this but it's the one kind of
Multiverse that is not talked about
really it's not really referred to here
in the making sense podcast with Max
tegmark so a lot of this part of the
conversation between Sam and Max I'm
skipping past in fact I've missed an
entire bit and I'm not going to talk
about it at all where they do discuss
information and its relationship to
mathematics I'm going to skip over that
and here as well I think I can skip
through a lot of the Multiverse stuff
because if you go back to part one of my
treatment of this conversation what you
will see there is that I basically
summarize the four levels of Multiverse
that Max endorses in somewhere other
than I talk about it there so I won't go
through that again now I'll let Max just
speak and then he moves on to the
simulation hypothesis and I'll have a
few things to say about that so let's
get into the discussion today
so I now want to get into the Multiverse
which is probably the strangest Concept
in science now it's something that I
thought I understood before picking up
your book and then I discovered there
were there were three more flavors of
Multiverse than I realized existed I
want to talk about the Multiverse but
first let's just start with the universe
because this is a a term that around
which there is some confusion let's just
get our bearings what do we mean or what
should we mean by the term universe and
I want to start with your your level one
Multiverse so if it's possible give us a
a brief understand brief description of
the concept of inflation inflation that
that gets us there sure so what what is
our universe first of all before we
start talking about others many people
as sort of passively assume that
universe is a synonym for the for
everything that exists and if so by
definition there can't be anything more
and talk apparently universes would just
be silly right but that is in fact not
what people generally in cosmology mean
when they say universe when they say our
universe they mean the spherical region
of space from which light has had time
to reach us so far during the 13.8
billion years since our big bang so
that's in other words everything we
could possibly see even with unlimited
funding for telescopes right and so if
that's our universe we can reasonably
ask well is there more space beyond that
you know from which light has not yet
reached us but might reach us tomorrow
or or in a billion years and if there is
if there are if space goes on Far Beyond
this if it's infinite or just vastly
larger than the space we can see
than all these other regions which are
as big as our universe
if they also have galaxies and planets
in them and so on it would be kind of
arrogant to not call them universes as
well because the people who live there
will call that their universe
[Music]
unfair or misleading in a way
you say Max defines into existence there
something that as someone who trained in
astronomy and far be it for me to
quibble with a world-renowned
cosmologist but what I was taught
throughout my degrees in this was that
we know as a matter of big bang and
inflation cosmology that of course there
is this thing the observable universe
which Max defines quite rightly there as
the region of space where light has had
time to reach us but we know as a matter
of fact that that's not all of space
that continues with that and continuing
to expand is space beyond that
continuous with that it's just that the
light hasn't had time to reach us from
that particular region just yet so you
can go all the way to the deepest
recesses of space I don't know how far
it is 40 billion light years away by the
way it's further than 13.7 billion light
years because of inflation because of
the expansion of the universe so from
here to the third is the way possible is
something like 40 billion is whatever
this spherical region of space but we
know there's space beyond that the
theory tells us that and then in fact
because space is expanding at those
furthest Forest reaches faster than the
speed of light and space can expand
faster than the speed of light
Einstein's theory of relativity says you
cannot move through space faster than
the speed of light but space itself can
expand faster than the speed of light so
there are galaxies there at the edge of
the universe which are moving beyond
being expanded beyond what we can see so
that might be visible today but cannot
possibly be visible tomorrow because
they've disappeared Beyond the Horizon
of light where light can reach us so we
know this is going on this is a matter
of science this is a matter of normal
science so this is why generally when
this kind of material is taught to
students of astronomy and cosmology
they're taught so therefore you've got
this observable universe this ring and
then out of that is another concentric
ring concentric sphere would be more
precise of a region of space Contin
perfectly continuous with that which
contains the galaxies and planets and
all that other stuff all the stuff that
we see but it just goes on even further
beyond what we can see so that's all the
universe okay so the physical universe
is that thing and that's usually what
astronomers astrophysics cosmologists
refer to as the universe and they
distinguish that from the observable
universe that's why to be honest it's
just idiosyncratically max tegmark as
far as I'm aware who refers to this as
the level one Multiverse so it just
seems a bizarre way of confusing people
and people already object to the idea of
Multiverse but so so it's kind of it's a
little off-putting which is why you know
people just say just talk about the
universe just everything that exists
some stuff that exists we can't see and
we've talked about that ad nauseam on
here so this is why I say level one
Multiverse I don't know if it counts as
a Multiverse it's more like just the
universe and the strange thing is Max
concedes as much himself soon in this
conversation he just says well the level
one Multiverse that's just another way
of talking about space space
so the only reason for the term here
seems to be to distinguish between the
region of space that's observed or
observable in principle and the region
of space that is not observable in
principle but if that's the Criterion a
spatially connected region that's not
observable in principle scientifically
well it's the core of a typical star
Another Universe in some sense is the
image of a black hole Another Universe
in some sense well of course some
cosmologists might actually argue that
well the innards of a neutron star then
you know not observable in principle we
don't have any good explanation about
how you would even go about beginning to
build an instrument that will be able to
get there another Universe no I think
this is misleading this is this is just
an unnecessary use of a term which
should be used precisely and in science
we want Precision with our terms to the
extent that we can get Precision yes
everything is ambiguous and all that
sort of stuff granted we should try and
have an economy of terminology
especially precise scientific
terminology I think it just degrades
things we just start throwing the words
around everywhere all right I've made
enough of a point on that we'll come
back to it again shortly let's keep
going anyway and
um inflation is very linked to this
because it's the best theory we have for
what created our big bang and made our
space the way it is so vast and so
expanding and it actually predicts
generically that space is not just
really big but vast and in most cases
actually infinite which would mean if
that's true if inflation actually
happened that what we call our universe
is really just a small part of of a much
bigger space so in other words
space then is much bigger than the part
of space that we call
our universe and this is something
actually I don't think is particularly
weird once one gets the terminology
straight because it's just
history all over again right we we
humans have been the masters of
underestimation
we've had this over inflated ego where
we want to put ourselves in the center
and assume that everything that we know
about is everything that exists and
we've been proven wrong again and again
and again discovering that everything we
thought existed is just a small part of
a much drier structure a planet
solar system a Galaxy a Galaxy cluster
our universe and maybe also a hierarchy
now of parallel universes
oh
so max is of course quite right there
about the history and it's a point I've
made here on topcast many times before
the history of science the history of
physics cosmology in particular
astronomy is this history of gradually
our understanding becoming ever larger
of stuff our understanding and so we
used to think it was just basically
planet Earth with Celestial spheres and
we didn't know what they were but then
we figured out we actually occupied this
thing called the solar system which is
bigger than the planet and realize well
the solar system is actually inside this
thing called the Galaxy ah the Galaxy
well it's just one among many galaxies
so I've got this whole thing called the
universe and well it shouldn't be much
of a surprise that we have this
Multiverse now the only sense in which I
disagree kind of with Max here I think
is that the proper epistemology allows
you to distinguish between what's known
in the sense of having a good
explanation a solution that solves a
particular problem and no longer has any
Rivals and so therefore you say it is
the explanation of something and
competing hypotheses where you don't
really know and you don't even have a
method of being able to test for these
things just yet and that you can't rule
out the Alternatives that's a key thing
you can't rule out the Alternatives just
yet so you can't say you know these
things so these are not all on equal
footing these levels of multiversals are
not on equal footing for that reason but
the way that Max talks it's as if it's
as if they're kind of you know these all
exist and you know you buy one so why
won't you buy the other ones well
because some of them are well-known good
explanations that solve a particular
problem because that level one
Multiverse which I just again insist on
calling the universe it solves a
particular problem it enables us to
explain observations of the actual
universe that we have in cosmology like
the cosmic microwave background like the
ratio of hydrogen to helium that we
observe out there in outer space like
the expansion the redshift of galaxies
the expansion of space so it solves
these things so the Dark Knight Skies
another one so this is solved by
postulating and expanding universe and a
universe therefore beyond what we can
actually observe so that solves the
problem the everettian Multiverse solves
a problem it's like how do we explain
the observations of things like
interference experiments everetti and
Multiverse we need to invoke the
existence of these parallel other
universes that contain fungible
instances of every single particle okay
so that's that but then when we get into
these other ones these level two
multiverses and especially level four
Multiverse they're they are hypotheses
that aren't yet that don't get count as
good explanations why well because in
the case of let's take level four let's
take level four the level four
multiverses is this idea that all
different physical laws exist out there
somewhere or other so all the logical
possible universes are out there
somewhere other now the overwhelming
majority of those are governed by
physical laws which are completely
hostile to life so why would you think
this thing up well one reason you would
think up this plenitude these other
universes with other physical laws is to
solve the problem of why the constants
of nature here in our universe appear to
be finely tuned now
I think the fine-tuning problem is a
problem but there is a debate in physics
between physics some of whom say well
it's not a problem but here's the thing
we don't know the answer to this
fine-tuning problem we don't know why
the constants appear to have been finely
tuned to allow for life here in this
universe change any of the constants Max
will come to this and you won't get life
change them by too much and you won't
get life but here we are it seems a
remarkable coincidence that conditions
are just right we're in the Goldilocks
zone not only for one constant but for
all the constants it's remarkable it's a
remarkable thing one such solution is
well you've got this Multiverse of all
the other universes with different
physical laws most of which don't have
life so why should we be surprised if
all the other universes are out there of
course we're going to find ourselves in
the one that is very bio-friendly it's
friendly towards life and intelligence
okay now truth be told you don't even
need level four for this you just need
Max's so-called level 2 Multiverse which
he's coming to shortly but he switches
between these things pretty fast and
this conversation so sometimes it's hard
to keep track level two is just the
class of universes defined by all
solutions to string theory or something
like that whatever all our physical
constants they still exist in those
other universes but they take on all
possible values somewhere or other in
that Multiverse but presumably quantum
theory and general relativity they still
hold or string theory still holds so the
laws themselves are the same the form of
the laws but the constants are not so
this is one way of arguing about
fine-tuning and one way of solving in
scare quotes the problem of fine-tuning
we find ourselves in the universe or in
one of these small number of universes
where the constants are just right and
all the others actually exist out there
somewhere or other of course you could
have wildly different constants and
wildly different physical laws making a
bio-friendly universe and then you might
get life but that's level four
indeed in level 4 you might not even
have a constants at all who knows what
goes on in level four you just have
every logically possible Universe every
logically possible thing in some magic
really does work uh the the Star Wars
universe is actually out there literally
real in this level 4 universe universe
is violating conservation laws and
universes where you can go through space
faster than light add infinitum and add
infinitive in every single sense there
that's called the plenitude David Lewis
wrote a book like I said about this
and this by the way makes the plenitude
easy to vary the plenitude all logically
possible universes are what Max calls
the ultimate Ensemble anything that in
his mind is even conceivable but I would
say actually conceivable is too limited
a word for this maybe what is
inconceivable still exists and still
counts as possible why is our ability to
conceive it a constraint on what logical
reality is as a whole I doubt we can get
agreement on what counts as conceivable
or logically possible is God the
Christian God logically possible what
about Zeus what about other Creator Gods
if they're logically possible if they
obey logic then they exist out there
somewhere other and they're creating
universes and presumably our own too in
an infinite number of universes or if
these gods are not logical never mind
physical then what is logically possible
and are other Logics permitted in these
other logically possible universes after
all what we consider logical is what is
knowable to us as logical in this
universe obeying these laws of physics
perhaps in other universes with other
laws of physics they can compute stuff
which includes coming to know things
that includes an understanding of a
logic deeper than ours or different to
ours this is quickly becoming
mind-bending self-referential stuff
illogical perhaps so whatever the case
maybe then Yahweh doesn't seem so
strange to you now maybe the Hindu gods
don't seem so strange anymore by any
measure the plenitude the level 4
Multiverse is far stranger because it
includes Yahweh and all the Hindu gods
and every other set of gods you like who
created our world
whatever the case these multiverses are
argued for on the basis of fine tuning
it's the only reason I ever see them
being invoked but well aside from in
philosophic purely philosophical
discussions but they only come into
physics in this uh this particular Way
by trying to solve fine-tuning but
fine-tuning remains a problem still
because many physicists don't agree with
this particular solution and quite right
too because as I say it's not a good
explanation I don't think this solves
the problem most don't think this solves
the problem by this explanation it's not
a good explanation it's too easy to vary
but in fact so are the alternatives to
it these multiverses especially the
number four Multiverse they're easy to
vary like people will vary on what is
conceivable or logical or possible in
that way because they're not constrained
by physics they're not even constrained
by imagination and maybe level four
consists of the infinite class of
logically possible human universes but
just not the one where the electron has
double the value of what it does in our
universe I mean that's a logically
possible Multiverse right so that's easy
to vary maybe they all exist except for
that one or they all exist except for
that one and where the electron has a
charge of triple hours add infinitum as
I say
anyway there are at least two other
competing theories for this okay that
that's a wild claim every possible
reality exists out there somewhere
pretty wild claim I think it's less wild
to be honest with you I think it's less
wild to postulate the fact that a God
created this universe a God created this
universe now why is it less wild well
because if every logically possible
Universe exists out there somewhere that
includes universes created by gods
universe is created by gods so if you
postulate every logically possible
Universe logically possible physically
logically possible it's logically
possible that you can have all powerful
beings that are out there some way or
other it's logical possible I can
imagine it if you can imagine it's
logically possible right I don't see a
contradiction in that other people are
going to say is a contradiction okay
well let's have something less than an
omnipotent okay but but but god-like
beings are out there for all intents and
purposes God like God like beings occupy
that Multiverse so isn't it more
parsimonious to just say rather than
have an infinite number of god-like
beings let's have one Godlike being that
created this universe seems more
parsimonious so these are two of the
competing claims now there's at least a
third I know which is that the physical
laws here are bio-friendly and we appear
the way that we do it because it's
mathematically necessarily required and
whatever the successor to Quantum Theory
and general relativity is or the
successes of the successor of that will
turn out to just have a set of equations
which require as a matter of
mathematical necessity logical necessity
that the constants have the values that
they do and so if this is the case world
that rules out the plenitude the
Multiverse of multiverses so to speak
we don't know but the way that the way
that you know some popularizes uh some
people in this very conversation are
talking it's as if that level four
Multiverse it counts just as well as the
level one Multiverse and the level three
Multiverse and I just don't think that
it does I don't think that it does we're
not distinguishing between these
different kinds of universes multiverses
rather in the way that we should what is
known not known to be true but known as
our best explanation known to be a good
explanation of the observed facts and
what is just one of many competing
hypotheses that you would invoke a
Multiverse for but there could be other
solutions that rule out that refute that
Multiverse so again to pick it up where
Max begins to talk about inflation
Theory which is interesting I'll have
some things to say about what he says
about inflation Theory here and also his
own sort of well walking back to a
certain extent of what this level one
Multiverse in scare quotes happens to be
so let's see what Max has to say
[Music]
first it's a great illustration of one
of the cool things in science where you
start with some pretty innocent
assumptions namely here that space just
goes on forever like most of us thought
as kids and moreover the things started
out a little bit randomly everywhere and
you get this totally shocking conclusion
if when I go ask my colleagues I would
say the vast majority of them would put
their money on the some form of
inflation happened and that our space
is actually much bigger than our
universe
whether it's actually infinite or just
really huge starts getting a little more
controversial and and we would love to
also we also don't know for sure of
course
whether inflation actually happened but
it's this is this is sort of the
simplest version of the theory where
space is simply goes on forever it's an
infinite space much like Euclid's space
or the one we thought about as kids and
uh in the book I call this the level one
Multiverse but you can just use the
synonym space for it and if and just to
drill down a little bit more on where
the craziness comes in if you have if
you look at the way our universe got
this way and the way our podcast came
about right is because we had about 10
to the power 78 quarks and electrons
here that started out in a particular
way somewhat random early on after
inflation which led to the formation of
our solar system and our planet and our
parents met and so on and we met and
then this this happened right if you
started the quarks out a little bit
differently things would have unfolded
differently and you can actually count
up how many different ways you can
arrange the quarks and electrons in our
universe and it turns out it's only
about a Googleplex different ways where
Googleplex is one with a Google zeros
and the Google is one with 100 zeros
it's a huge number but it's finite so it
if you have an infinite number of other
regions equally big and you start you
roll the dice again and all of them
then as you can calculate that if you go
about a googolplex meters away you will
indeed end up with just what you
describe the universe that's
extremely similar to this one except
that uh one minute ago you all of a
sudden you know decided to start
speaking Hungarian instead
friends
so there's three things I want to say
about what's just been said there the
first is that Max says that you can't
know for sure about whether or not
inflation is actually the explanation of
the beginning of the universe
and as we say here well if that's your
standard knowing for sure then you won't
know anything at all now inflation is an
interesting kind of an explanation I
would say we know the Big Bang occurred
and I would actually also tend in the
direction of saying that we know
inflation happened as well I just don't
think there are any other viable
competitors at the moment we need to
explain observations observations of
stuff like the cosmic microwave
background now the cosmic microwave
background has this feature of being
exceedingly smooth and what exceedingly
smooth means is that when you map the
slight temperature variations in the
empty space between galaxies this is the
cosmic microwave background radiation
the heat left over the residual heat
left over from The Big Bang well
actually you look far enough off into
the distance to about 300 000 years
after the big bang and you get this map
you get this map of the sky this is what
Kobe the cosmic microwave background
Explorer and W map the Wilkinson
microwave and isotropy probe and
recently the the Planck telescope these
satellites that are up there mapping
this Cosmic micro background whatever
the case what we find is that it's about
2.7 Kelvin this is 2.7 degrees Celsius
above absolute zero but there are
fluctuations in the temperature slightly
warm in this region slightly cooler in
this region but those fluctuations are
so small that the smallness of the
fluctuations cries out for an
explanation because the quantum
cosmologists say that well when the
universe was smaller than an atom then
there would have been these fluctuations
the fluctuations should have caused
greater temperature differences if you
just rely upon classical Big Bang Theory
the regular Big Bang Theory should have
magnified these temperature differences
but it's that we don't see these huge
temperature differences we see very
small temperature differences so why
they're small and not huge temperature
differences well inflation Theory
inflation Theory explains that and we
have no other explanation as far as I'm
aware of why it is that we observe what
we do so we've got this observation that
cries out for an explanation we have
only one explanation now someone comes
up with a rival then we would need to
have a crucial experiment test that
could decide between the theories but we
don't have any other Theory so the only
known explanation for why we're getting
this smoothness in the cosmic micro
background amongst other things by the
way amongst other things you can go
Googling or Wikipedia inflationary
cosmology the inflation Theory which is
just a version of The Big Bang Theory
and what you learn is that there are
observations that are explained by
inflation Theory but not explained by
anything else and so this is important
so this is why I would say it's quite
right and reasonable to say we know
inflation happened as we know the Big
Bang happened as we know evolution by
natural selection happens these are the
only known explanations of of the
observations that we have now do we know
these things for sure no again if that's
your standard well you're always going
to be disappointed in science and
everywhere else notice also that their
math admits what I was complaining about
earlier which is that this level one
Multiverse not really a Multiverse he
just says there it's a synonym for space
quite right I think that's quite right
that he should say that but then he also
says a thing that I might quibble with
just a little which is that if we have
this finite amount of matter but it can
be rearranged into a finite number of
different Arrangements nonetheless this
means that because they're such a
stupendous number of different
Arrangements that we could have that we
would have all possible Arrangements
represented there somewhere other I
don't know that that follows I don't
know that that falls out of the way in
which the physics actually works unless
of course you're talking about the
everettian quantum theory where yes
indeed there will be versions of you
versions of you that are very similar to
you and versions of you that are very
different to you but this idea of
traveling physically through space to
reach a another planet for example where
there's someone very similar to you
there I don't know that that follows we
would need another physical law law that
mandates that all the different possible
Arrangements really would be represented
out there in deep dark areas of our
universe somewhere other in other
spatially connected regions to the one
that we occupy here I don't know that it
follows that you're getting something
like the everettian Multiverse here in
our regular physical Universe just at a
great distance from us which is what
he's talking about here it could be it
very well could be that distant regions
of the universe have subtly different
physical properties to what is had here
because of just quirks of the big bang
for example quirks of the Big Bang could
distribute the matter in different ways
and so I could Clump together in
different ways and this would mean that
not all clumpings are going to lead to
the what we see around us in our region
a model collapsed together into a black
hole in some of these places it might
spread out into evacuous nothingness
there's nothing that says that the kind
of Multiverse he's talking about here
needs to represent all possible
configurations of matter that just might
not happen unless there's a physical law
that says well yes this kind of thing
happens but I I know of No Such physical
law that that mandates this this is in
the realm of the just the unknown just
the unknown it's it's a form of
metaphysics as I say it's a stepping
outside of science I don't know how we
could test this exactly yet yet let's
keep on going
[Music]
it's a very mind-boggling idea we don't
know for a fact that it's like this but
this is the sort of the vanilla flavored
cosmological model the one that is the
most popular today right right well and
I think the weak Link in this chain of
reasoning here or the place where a
skeptical person can get off this train
is in the Assumption or belief that
inflation implies an infinite Universe
rather than just a very large one and so
if it seems like you could pull pull the
brakes there but unfortunately that this
concept of a Multiverse judging from
your discussion of it in in your book
and this is this is what I didn't
understand before I picked up your book
seems over determined it seems that
there are other ways that arriving at
this Multiverse concept which we'll get
to and so it's it has a scientifically
speaking there are many reasons to
believe in a functionally infinite
number of copies of ourselves living out
lives of for all intents and purposes
exactly similar or differing to every
possible degree right so it's true to
say that everything that can happen does
happen under this rubric that's right so
just to distinguish between what we know
and what we don't know for sure the the
part that we don't know for sure is that
space is infinite or that there's an
infinite number of anything and for for
people who feel really bothered by these
implications and want to get rid of the
infinity in fact I I have a whole
section in the book where I attack
infinity and and list all the ways in
which you can get rid of the infinity so
there's a lot of interesting
opportunities there and and we're going
to know more I think in the next five or
ten years however what I think seems
pretty much inescapable at this point is
that the ultimate the full reality is at
least much larger than what we can see
there's just no way that
space ends exactly at the edge of our
universe in fact if you had made that
claim you know one minute ago I could
falsify it now by looking with a
telescope because I can see light that's
traveled from one minute farther away
and that's pretty far that's a sixth of
the way to the Sun an eighth of the way
to the sun already right and uh so we
should probably get used to the idea
that we live in a much grander reality
than than we thought we did and I think
that's a good thing exactly oh yeah no I
I so I don't think people's intuitions
recoil at the very very large or even I
think people are prepared to embrace the
infinite and the Eternal in some sense
even though we could debate whether
thinking about a beginning is actually
more understandable than thinking about
an eternal Universe given how squirrely
the beginning begins to look but I think
what what really will blow the mind of
anyone who thinks about it long enough
and and and seems very difficult to
accept is this idea at the level one
Multiverse what is implied by the just
the sheer concept of infinity that that
everything that is possible is in fact
actual on some level everything is true
and well let's just spell out why this
should be disturbing and why this may in
fact be at least at first glance a real
embarrassment to science because as
science Prides itself on being
parsimonious
thank you well now it's not the case at
the level one Universe in any way shape
or form says that everything that's
possible is true I don't get that that
everything is true in some way in fact I
think he said there's an ambiguity about
what that would mean anyway do we mean
if everything that's physically possible
is true or everything that's logically
possible is true well I can't mean the
last thing which is the level four
Multiverse so the level one Multiverse
which is just space even if space was
infinite even if space was infinite that
doesn't even imply that everything
physically possible would be true it
doesn't imply that at all I could
readily imagine an infinite space where
we occupy a region which is different to
the rest
you need to have a particular kind of
What's called the cosmological principle
which says that there's nothing
particularly special about our
particular region of space but we if we
don't have access to these other regions
of space this other infinite region of
space we could easily postulate other
regions of space which are empathy for
example you'd still have Infinite Space
or you could have any Infinite Space
beyond what we can see that is filled
with nothing but hydrogen nuclei which
is protons it would be basically a
featureless universe but the thing is if
we can't observe and if we don't have
good explanation of at this point what
this Infinite Space is like then you're
just postulating a particular
metaphysics once again saying that
somewhere off in this Infinite Space
there must be every single physically
possible thing represented there in some
way shape or form but I don't see that
that follows if all you're saying is
it's an infinite space even if you said
it's an infinite space like ours that
doesn't mean that you're going to
eventually get at Earth just like ours
here you have to add extra assumptions
to this idea the extra assumptions being
well you've got the same kind of
distribution of matter out there in
Infinite Space but that's a very
specific assumption that you're making
and it's ruling out all the ways in
which you don't have the same
distribution of matter elsewhere there's
something very special about the Earth
after all just I mean just
look around it's unusual the universe
vast as it is may only contain one Earth
may only contain one Earth of course
Infinity tends to sort some of these
things out for you but the level one
Multiverse I'm not so sure I'm not so
sure and certainly it does not imply it
certainly would not imply or logically
possible realities out there somewhere
that certainly doesn't follow okay Sam
and Max then go on to talk about
parsimony okay the the which is
basically Occam's razor this idea that
all else being equal we should choose
the simplest explanation Nation this was
why when I asked Professor Paul Davies
why didn't he endorse the Multiverse the
everettian Multiverse when I had the
chance to talk to him about this he
appealed to Occam's razor he said well
in order to explain the one Universe we
do observe we're invoking the existence
of an infinite number that we can't
observe and at the time I bought it of
course now I realized no Occam's razor
is about the number of independent
assumptions that you have and you know
the Multiverse the overaridian
Multiverse has no real additional
assumptions being added on to the
formalism of quantum theory it's just
saying well take the equation seriously
take them literally take the results of
the experiment seriously and this is all
you get you don't need to add anything
about Consciousness and the Observer or
anything else everything just obeys the
same physical laws and so therefore you
have these you have all matter of being
the same physical laws and the the
equations describe the existence of
these other things and it also explains
why you won't observe these other things
you can't communicate between universes
for example so so they they quite
rightly point out that parsimony or you
know recourse to the simplest Theory
Occam's razor whatever you however you
want to describe this is not a reason to
object to Multiverse theories in general
and certainly not a reason to object to
the Everett Multiverse but once again
they're they're kind of dancing around
the Aboriginal Multiverse they never get
there and talk about Quantum Theory
which is a shame that the one
the one really interesting by virtue of
the fact of being an explanation that is
unusual but also so far as we can tell
it's the correct one it's the right one
so I'm going to skip through all of that
because I think listeners to topcast
readers of the fabric of reality for
example know about Occam's razor and
parsimony and this this kind of thing
[Music]
let's press on into the the Multiverse
to level two except this will push
people's intuitions in the direction of
feeling like at the very least we're
trying to have our cake and eat it too
on this question of parsimony so so take
us to the the level two Multiverse and
uh perhaps say why this is a relevant to
the question of fine-tuning and um which
and the question to fine-tuning as many
people will recall is relevant to this
idea of that Many religious people have
of why religion the idea of a Creator
God in particular makes sense given the
apparent fine-tuning of our universe
good pleasure so the level two
Multiverse you can again
synonymously called simply space if you
want inflation is able to actually not
only make an infinite space but it's
actually able to make fit within this an
infinite number of regions that each
seam infinite to whoever lives inside of
them through some some very
very weird properties of Einstein's
gravity theory that I talked about in
the book and what's interesting about
this
is that the
when you ask how diverse is space
you might think oh you know
in some places our podcasts goes like
here and other places we talk about
other things but at least the laws of
physics are the same everywhere you
might think at least even if we love
people learn different things in history
class
if the Sam Harris somewhere else learns
different things in his history class
because the Quirk started out
differently there and history played out
differently at least he's going to learn
the same thing in physics class
but the level two Multiverse changes
that also because it turned out that a
lot of things that we thought were
fundamental laws of physics that were
true everywhere in space
we're actually not it seems
and I like them I like to think about it
as if I were a fish swimming around in
the ocean
I would think that it's a law of physics
the water is something you can swim
through
because that's the only kind of water I
know when it seems to be that way
everywhere I look but it
partish I could solve the equations
discover the equations for water and I
could solve them and see that there are
actually three solutions not one there's
the water solution and also ice and
steam
equivalently there are a lot of hints
now in physics that where we call empty
space is also like that that it can
freeze and melt and come in many
different variants
and the thing is inflation is so violent
that if space actually can be in many
different forms what inflation will do
is it will create each of those kinds of
space and an infinite amount of it to
that
so if we go really really far away you
might find yourself in a in a part of
space where there are not actually
six kinds of quirks like throughout here
but maybe there are ten kinds of quarks
so the level two Multiverse is very very
diverse also a lot of things that we
learn in school are fundamental
parameters of physics
for example that the number 1836
seems kind of hardwired into our world
in that that the proton is 1836 times
heavier than an electron why is that
well
String Theory suggests that actually
that's one of those things that also
changes depending on what kind of space
you have so it might be 2015 somewhere
else in 666 somewhere else
and this explains this fine-tuning
problem that you mentioned because we've
discovered as I alluded to earlier that
there are these 32 numbers pure numbers
with no units or anything that we've
measured that we can use to calculate
everything else and we wonder a lot
about where they came from so these are
the constants of nature okay could you
just list a few of them to give people a
sense yeah so 1836 is one of them how
much heavier the proton is in a neutron
you can transform them in different ways
another one which is super talked about
these days is that the density of dark
energy
okay so as I explained in episode one of
my discussion of their discussion the
level two Multiverse is a version of the
Multiverse where it's presumed that the
initial conditions are somewhat
different and indeed the contents of
nature are somewhat different and this
arises out of as Max is explaining their
versions of string theory now we don't
know this is a kind of metaphysics as to
whether or not such universes exist but
we're still within the realm of although
he insinuated there that the laws are
physically different not really we still
have although we might have different
numbers of quarks in these other
universes we still have quarks for
example we're still bounded by what
String Theory says is possible so we're
not yet in the realm of all logically
possible universes we're not there yet
but we are saying well you can vary the
constants of nature let's say but we
still have constants of nature those
concepts of nature still exists and so
perhaps we can explore the space of all
different contents of nature now this is
actually done by some people some people
this is their job cosmologists Luke
Barnes who is easily found on Twitter is
one of the people I follow on Twitter
he's a cosmologist at the University of
Western Sydney who works with Grant
Lewis who is an astrophysicist at the
University of Sydney they've written
books on this well they've written at
least one book called A fortunate
Universe now there have been many books
written on this idea of fine tuning some
people disagree with fine tuning I buy
it as being a problem why is it that we
inhabit a region of space where the
constants are what they are we don't
know yet and as I've already explained
it could be it could be that we have
this Multiverse of universes where all
the different concepts of nature are out
there represented somewhere or other
okay that could be the case and we of
course occupy the one where the
constants are just right and there are
many other universes kind of like this
as well well the work of Luke Barnes
among others sort of suggests that this
fine-tuning is very very fine-tuned and
we need an explanation for this many
people say we don't need an explanation
for this now Barnes for one thinks that
it's a very poor explanation to say well
it's the Multiverse that explains this
stuff and I'll I'll give a link in the
information for this podcast and for
this episode uh to his material on this
he does some wonderful lectures he's
also been on closer to truth which is
probably my favorite YouTube channel out
there he's been interviewed there he's
an Aussie and so he has this to my mind
anyway a rather clear way of speaking
about this stuff and no-nonsense sort of
way of speaking about this stuff he's
had debates with people like Sean
Carroll and he's had debates with people
like Sabine hossenfelder so uh you know
he's talking to some of the big names
out there about all of this stuff and he
really knows his stuff I mean he is
really across this and he does things
like simulates entire universes in
supercomputers to see what happens when
you alter these contents of nature just
to see what happens so it does seem like
there's a problem there certainly one of
the things that I was most interested in
exploring when I was doing formal
studies in astronomy and cosmology was
looking into this issue of just how
fine-tuned the contents of nature are
could you change them very much at all
and well it turns out you you can't
change them very much at all you know
you're just just the smallest changes to
things like the value of the
gravitational constant the strength of
gravity or the the value of the mass of
the proton these kind of things either
cut changes in these kind of things
either cause all matter in the universe
to collapse into black holes and so you
don't get any stars therefore you're not
going to get any planets or cause a
universe where the gravity isn't strong
enough in order to collapse matter into
stars at all in the first place and so
all you're left with is clouds of
hydrogen helium gas so you'd have no
life in such a universe there either so
that's just a few of the constants now
as for all the other contents well you
can have changes in cosmological
constants that cause a ripping apart of
space-time very early on reversal even
just after the big bang you get an
immediate re-collapse into a big crunch
kind of thing so this is a very
interesting question uh open area of
research we don't know much yet and so
this is what they're talking about here
with this kind of level two Multiverse
that may be all the different concepts
of nature are out there being explored
somewhere other but they're still Bound
by the basic laws of physics these
universes are obeying different versions
of string theory that's one thing so
they're still obeying a certain kind of
explanation unlike the level four one as
I keep mentioning where you're having
every single kind of physical or being
so forget String Theory that's just one
tiny sliver of all the possible physical
laws that you could have which is what
the level four one is but in either case
do we know as in to say we have a good
explanation of this as being an account
of reality a reality that we inhabit so
let me skip towards the end of their
discussion on the Multiverse
if it's in and it just suggests that
everything that happens that can happen
within the the laws of physics does
happen with the level two we're talking
about inflation creating an infinite
number of bubble universes which wherein
the laws of physics themselves vary in
every conceivable way and we
just interject so it doesn't sound too
weird instead of talking about Bubble
universes we can just keep saying space
because there's still only one space but
there's a reason we can't but it's not
it's not space in a straightforward
sense that that is oh it is actually but
the reason the reason we can never get
to another part of the level two
Multiverse is because in order to go
there you would have to go through a
region of space which is still inflating
and stretching out so like if if you're
if you have your kids in the back seat
asking are we there yet you know you
would say oh yeah we'll be there in uh
one hour and a little bit later they ask
are we there yet and you'll be like yeah
we'll be there in two hours right so so
inflation can actually create this funny
situation where you have many even
infinite regions of space that are still
fitting into one single piece of space
so that's that's one clarification it's
still just this one space but messy and
and the second thing is it's not that
the actual laws of physics are different
it's just that things that we thought
were laws of physics turned out to
actually just be different solutions to
the laws of physics exactly ice is not a
different law of physics from liquid
water or steam they turn out to be three
different solutions to a to the
equations for water and and that's
something Autumn would like because it
makes physics itself simpler and it
makes history more complicated that's a
fascinating idea and it is one that
closes the door to this otherwise
embarrassing problem of fine-tuning
which is you know how did we how is it
that we find ourselves in the universe
that seems perfectly tuned to support
life and intelligent life and and beings
exactly like ourselves in a position to
wonder about these things and there have
been other efforts to close that door
just with the what's been called the the
anthropic principle which you stated
earlier just that the only place we can
find ourselves is a place that's
compatible with with our existence and
so that shouldn't be surprising and yet
it has seemed surprising that
essentially that we should exist at all
that the Universe could have been an
infinite number of ways and it just
happened to be this way well in
according to the level two Multiverse
the universe is essentially an infinite
number of ways and there are an infinite
number of universes that are not
compatible with live it's kind of it's a
darwinian principle of universe
emergence that the only places you can
find yourself are the places you've you
confined yourself and every place that
is possible in some sense exists yeah I
I don't like the use of the term
anthropic principle for these sort of
things because the word principle makes
it sound like it's somehow optional I
mean it's just direct use of logic which
of course is not optional you know the
the uh it's like why are you really
really surprised that out of all the
eighth planets in our solar system we're
living on Earth rather than Venus where
it's 900 fahrenheit right now or on
Jupiter where there's more surfaces than
on you're probably not very surprised I
wouldn't call that some deep principle
it's just common sense that the the vast
majority of our solar system is is not
very friendly for our kind of life and
the vast majority of space is horrible
for our kind of life and uh therefore we
shouldn't be very surprised is that
we're living in a special very a very
special part of the space that we can
see yeah and it is kind of advice that
we're living in a special part of the
space we can't see either so one way of
closing the door to the the this mystery
of fine-tuning which doesn't entail yet
another Multiverse so a level two
Multiverse is this idea that we could be
in a simulation I don't know if this
argument originates with uh your friend
Nick Bostrom or if other people have a I
know other people have arrived at this
independently but the argument is older
but Nick Bostrom made a very detailed
argument for why we he thinks it's
actually likely that we live in a
simulation right so so and yeah so I
guess we can open the door to that too
so the his argument in brief is that if
you imagine ourselves in the distant
future or or beings like ourselves that
make vast gains in their ability to
produce computers and it stands to
reason that they will simulate you
universes and beings very much like
ourselves on those computers assuming
that such a thing is possible and
there's really no reason to think it
isn't and then by just Dent of the
numbers you would expect simulations to
vastly outnumber real universes and
therefore you would expect that you
should be in a simulation rather than in
a real universe that argument sort of
stands on its own unrelated to this
issue of of fine-tuning or or a or the
Multiverse but if taken seriously the
the prospect of being in a simulation it
does answer this fine-tuning argument as
well
so I always want to ask if the
simulation hypothesis what problem does
it solve I don't know that it solves
this fine change yet another one it's
just an appeal to the supernatural but
but if we do live in a simulation then
that will be revealed to us eventually
people might say oh how could it
possibly well we would get to a point
where a problem would arise that would
require us to postulate something
outside of the simulation
a simulation won't necessarily have
infinite complexity in fact nothing can
have infinite complexity but reality
itself now David Deutsch argues this in
the fabric of reality a simulation has
to be running on a computer which
presumably is in a genuine physical
reality of some kind Computing stuff
obeying the laws of that universe but
the computer that the simulation is
running on will have finite memory
finite processing speed and so we would
get to a point where we'd be delving
into subatomic particles what we think
are subatomic particles and just get to
the point where we realize or we resolve
the individual bits and this would be
telling this would be telling us to if
we got to the end like that an end point
like that then we would have to ask why
and if there was no such answer we'd
have to postulate that this reality
exists in another reality namely a
simulation type thing that is causing it
to resolve into these fund mental things
which can't be broken down any further I
can't imagine what that would be like
exactly but there would come a wall
before us when it comes to progress and
that would cry out for an explanation an
explanation that couldn't be within the
universe because the universe after all
at that point would be bounded would be
this wall but we could then ask the
question what's outside the universe
because we'd get to the end of it in
some way I don't mean the end of it in
space necessarily although that could be
a possibility as well but the end in
some way to us resolving stuff uh
finding Solutions now in particular the
smallest particles of matter there would
be a smallest particle of matter or
something the equivalent of that some
some problem would just get solved and
there would be no way of moving beyond
that no matter of making progress unless
we postulate something smaller still but
there wouldn't be something smaller
still it would be a strange reality to
occupy so we would find out we would be
able to find out we're in the simulation
we would postulate the existence of
something else on which this simulation
is running and it doesn't solve anything
anyway I mean because the simulation
hypothesis still postulates a
fundamental actual reality so saying
we're in a simulation is just to say
we're in a thing that's in physical
reality or in a thing that's in a thing
that's in physical reality it doesn't
deny the existence of physical reality
and the simulation hypothesis still
postulates just more stuff in physical
reality that's all and the physical
reality is something different to what
we think it is but it doesn't mean it's
completely and utterly inaccessible why
because we've got Universal Minds so we
can always guess at what's outside and
perhaps do tests and get sick find wait
who knows the creative people of the
future if we do live in a simulation
would come up with ideas about how to
test this kind of stuff anyway Naval
gazing I would say is this kind of thing
where it doesn't solve any problem of
ours right now I've spoken about the
simulation hypothesis before so I'm
going to skip past what uh seven Max say
on this point
[Music]
so well this might be a good bridge and
now I'm mindful of of your time here uh
so we're not doing anything like justice
to the contents of your book uh we're
gonna skip over the other ways in which
you can arrive at a conception of a
Multiverse in particular the quantum
mechanical issues addressed by Hugh
Everett and all of that is fascinating
and it's just another route into
Infinite copies of ourselves having uh
infinite versions of this podcast and no
doubt in some of those podcasts we treat
these these uh topics at much greater
length but I think this is a good bridge
to AI where which is where you and I met
okay so there we go and I would say
unfortunately
unfortunately Max doesn't get to explain
the everettian view of the Multiverse I
like to hear how other people explain
that particular good scientific
explanation
um yes so Max's book is well worth
getting on this point but like Sean
Carroll I think that he mistakes the
testability of the Multiverse the
ever-ready and Multiverse which David
Deutsch of course written a paper on
so here at the end I think it's
important just to make some concluding
summary remarks Max tegmark is of course
a great thinker a very good physicist
highly accomplished and a clear writer
of some fascinating topics however
having read the mathematical universe
and having heard a couple of interviews
with him what I find is that there is a
certainly a difference in epistemology
let's just say that between a
perspective that David Deutsch presents
in the fabric of reality in the
beginning of infinity
and what you get in something like Max's
book our mathematical universe and I am
going to read a little just a few short
Snippets from his book just to give you
a taste of what I mean about this
difference between epistemologies and
how it comes to affect something like
the physics and the conclusions and
importantly what I would say is the
metaphysics the broader reality within
which one's physics sits one's way of
understanding just reality at the
broadest possible scale I think this is
why having a good understanding of
Summer epistemology at least clarifies
things because two misconceptions tend
to creep in the one is as you would have
heard when Max speaks there and Sam can
tend to do this sometimes as well is
that they make a dividing line between
knowing and knowing for sure
so he said that phrase at least twice
that I recall in the recordings that I
made of that discussion he would say
it's something we don't yet know for
sure but we can't know for sure yet he
implies we can but how do we know for
sure we either know something or we
don't know something and that's that we
can just say of these Multiverse
theories yes we know that's the good
explanation of what's going on or we
don't know yet yet and I would say that
for what he's calling level one
absolutely we know it's part of our
knowledge this is predictive it's
explanatory it describes what's going on
out there in the universe it is the
universe it is just our explanation of
spaces we understand it and the level
three Multiverse yes we know it we know
it as the explanation of what's
happening in quantum theory so I agree
with Max possibly for different reasons
but I agree with Max for that reason
season although perhaps we also differ
on things like whether or not we know
once and for all we know for sure that
these things are true I would just say
we know them well the the the appending
of for sure is a Superfluous unnecessary
in fact it reduces the meaning of no to
something that means it's your useless
kind of a word because you never reach
this for sure bar but Max does conflate
the two at times know and know for sure
he wants to say it can't be known until
it's known for sure and it's the sure
part that makes it known and sure means
certain but how can we be certain the
history of science is enough to give us
fallibalism the the overturning of
previous theories that people many
people were certain of at the time and
you also hear throughout the discussion
Max making quite a point about this
unobserved stuff being a part of Science
and Sam agreeing as well and of course I
agree and David Deutsche agrees that the
unobserved is absolutely a part of
science but Papa continues to be
denigrated in some way as if pop is
epistemology implies that the unobserved
is not accounted for because it's not
testable within his conception of
reality which is completely wrong in
fact popper is the only one who is able
to explain how via David Deutsche would
say that we get to a knowledge of the
unobserved through our theories via our
observations when you're an empiricist
which so many people are they say that
well knowledge is derived from What You
observe and so you're stuck within What
You observe it's but it is difficult to
get a handle on exactly where Max is
coming from in constructing knowledge as
such
I can't find references to him
describing himself as a Bayesian and
certainly he doesn't make a big deal of
it in the indices of his books let's say
he can't find the word base or
bayesianism there however you do find
claims that he believes his theories he
says as much this is completely unlike
what popper implored us to do and what
physicists like Michael Faraday thought
Michael Faraday said something to the
effect of I hold my theories on the tips
of my fingers so the merest breath of
fact will blow them away so he
understood testability he understood
that you can have your theories all day
long but once the observation comes
along and a refutes your theory in light
of a better Theory well so much for
having believed your theory because I
need to believe your theories scientists
shouldn't believe their theories it's
the wrong epistemology it's the wrong
way of going about science science
explains the world through
misconceptions we say misconceptions
because we should expect death theories
to contain some error not to be the
final word on things and because there's
an error there they'll be fixed one day
overturned and we'll look back and go
well that was a misconception useful as
it was to solve problems and getting
something right about the world saying
something correct something true
containing truth an explanation but
nonetheless ultimately in the final
analysis is false a misconception so why
believe it why think it's true what does
this word belief mean in this sense what
function does it serve once one begins
believing things one ceases to be a
fallibilist but then of course at other
times Max says but we don't know for
sure so it's hard to know exactly where
he's coming from it's not there's not a
consistency there in the book I've just
released a podcast called Lookouts and
it's about World Views and it says why
having a world view which in other words
I would say not only a rich deep
foundational understanding of the
science but also having an understanding
of what metaphysics is ontology
epistemology and how these things relate
to everything else
science physics mathematics and and how
all of this can come to bear on broader
even more important things perhaps like
morality and having a conception of all
of these things that is encompassed by a
philosophy of how to make progress how
to understand the world and that we
don't get to final answers and the
problem with thinking that one can get
to final answers rather than simply
improve continuously over time and it's
going to read an excerpt from page 880
from our mathematical Universe this is
chapter 12. so it's a big tone all about
the different levels of Multiverse and
he says this is Max tegmark speaking
quote interestingly in the context of
the mathematical Universe hypothesis the
existence of the level 4 Multiverse
isn't optional as we discussed in detail
in the previous chapter the mathematical
Universe hypothesis says that a
mathematical structure is our external
physical reality rather than saying
merely a description thereof this
equivalent between physical and
mathematical existence means that if a
mathematical structure contains a
self-aware substructure it will perceive
itself as existing in a physically real
Universe just as you and I do albeit
generically a universe with different
properties from ours Stephen Hawking
famously asked what is it that breathes
fire into the equations and makes the
universe for them to describe in the
context of the mathematical Universe
hypothesis there's no fire breathing
required since the point isn't that a
mathematical structure describes a
universe but that it is a universe
moreover there's no making required
either you can't make a mathematical
structure it simply exists it doesn't
exist in space and time space and time
may exist in it in other words all
structures that exist mathematically
have the same ontological status and the
most interesting question isn't which
ones exist physically they all do end
quote so as I say that's from chapter 12
and it's from a section in chapter 12
the title of which
is and I'll read you the title why I
believe in the level 4 Multiverse
so I think that that that's just a
departure from science
I'm afraid to say it's somewhat a
departure from rationality he calls what
he's doing the mathematical Universe
hypothesis yet he says he believes it
why what is the rational reason we're
not given one we're told that all
mathematical structures just exist now
this is confusing necessary truth with
our knowledge of the necessary truth
he's saying that he's gotten to the
ultimate final truth and that truth is
that the entire universe consists of
mathematics in fact there are an
infinite number of universes out there
that are made of mathematics
but what privileges mathematics what
makes the difference between the
abstract mathematical objects and the
abstract any other objects the
difficulty for Max fundamentally is that
he cannot get outside of his physical
brain now he argues in a circular way he
says that everything is mathematical
it's the it's the it's Pythagoras idea
all his number he begins with that
assumption and then reaches that
conclusion in the end as well rather
than starting with problems for example
what is the brain figuring out well okay
the brain is made of neurons what do
neurons made of they're made of atoms
okay that's a form of matter what are
the laws that matter must obey well
Quantum laws of physics are the quantum
laws of physics computable indeed they
are and that all physical structures
undergo physical processes themselves
which are computable and that includes
brains that includes brains that do
mathematics to come to an understanding
of mathematics however what we also
understand via this process by this
understanding of computational
universality is that computers can
introduce errors they're not perfect
machines they can error correct but
there's no getting around the fact that
it could be the case that a mistake is
made at any point during the explanation
the computation the calculation everyone
to put it a neuron can misfire an
electron can go the wrong way a person
can just make a mistake and that cannot
be escaped from and that includes any
conclusion reached by that brain or mind
we should say and that includes Minds
that come to the conclusion that for
example everything is made of maths that
everything consists of mathematics and
therefore level four multiverses exists
don't necessarily exist must exist but
this has all been arrived at Via a brain
obeying the laws of physics via
something we know we know we know that
and so we know that it can't be the case
that we can simultaneously know for sure
that the mathematical Universe exists as
in the mathematical Multiverse that Max
tegmark says exists so what I'm sad to
say is he is ignoring known science it's
true for him to say it's a mathematical
Universe hypothesis but it is a rational
for him to say that therefore he
believes it a scientist shouldn't
believe their own theories even when
they're known when they are the best
explanations but in this case we don't
even have a known Theory it's not even a
good explanation it's just one
explanation among many among many to
solve certain problems those problems
I've already mentioned are just things
like the fine tuning issue the fine
tuning problem what Max wants and this
is has been true across the eons is a
certain Foundation that explains
absolutely everything once and for all
it's a kind of religious notion this
idea that you know God created
everything and that you know the
ultimate answers are held by God and
there's nothing beyond that well the
mathematical Universe especially the
level 4 Multiverse is that structure it
is that thing it serves that purpose it
answers all questions let's just go on a
little further and I'll just read from
page 959 of his book and he says quote
the level four Multiverse does not imply
that all imaginable universes exist
we humans can imagine many things that
are mathematically undefined and hence
don't correspond to mathematical
structures mathematicians publish papers
with existence proofs that demonstrate
the mathematical consistency of various
mathematical structure descriptions
precisely because to do this is
difficult and not possible in all cases
end quote elsewhere when Max writes on
this he does speak in terms of all
conceivable things exist if you can
conceive it then it exists but now he's
saying that not all imaginable
universities exist maybe what he means
or should say when he's speaking more
carefully is that all conceivable
mathematical structure exists out there
somewhere other but as I also pointed
out during this podcast in other
universes with different laws of physics
if there are people in those universes
with different laws of physics then they
are able to prove different things about
different mathematical structures and so
their conclusions that they reach about
this level 4 Multiverse if it exists
would be different to ours so whatever
he's saying about the level 4 Multiverse
here by his own Reckoning should be
different in other parts of the level 4
Multiverse so what do we say who's Liv
and Paul Multiverse is it is it
constrained by the mathematics that's
known here or known there or rather
provable here or provable there we can't
say it's not easy to know I don't know
if the question is well defined either
it's true to say that logic is logic is
logic and Mathematics is mathematics as
mathematics regardless of where you are
but assertions about what mathematical
structures exist based on what human
brains can do trying to reach
conclusions about places where the
physics is places where the physics is
so different that what can be understood
by mathematics is literally literally
inexplicable to us because our brain
simply is unable to grock stuff that
brains presumably obeying completely
different laws of physics are able to
rock well we're getting into the
intractable area of metaphysics and
fantasy so it's very difficult to talk
about these things and this is why it
would be straight strange for me to hear
someone say they believe this stuff but
his problem is and what he can't escape
from is he's making claims about this
level four Multiverse in this sense at
least where he said it doesn't imply
that all imaginable universes exist we
humans can imagine many things that are
mathematically undefined and hence don't
correspond to mathematical structures so
he's saying that if they're not
mathematically defined here by us
presumably by our mathematicians then
they won't exist in the level 4
Multiverse but our capacity to imagine
stuff is constrained by our brain that
obeys these laws of physics here if the
laws of physics elsewhere are different
in the level 4 Multiverse which by
definition they will be then there will
be people there whose brains are
operating on laws of physics that allow
them to compute and hence to image
engine structures that we can't imagine
so he's contradicting himself that this
itself doesn't make any sense this is an
incoherent notion which is a problem for
the level 4 Multiverse much less
believing in such a Multiverse based
upon this argument these
these are the kind of discussions people
have when they've had too many beers or
smoke too much weed I think this is it's
just it is metaphysics it's not
constrained by what we know but if you
want to have this sort of discussion it
should it should at least begin in what
we know and what we know at the moment
are laws of physics to the extent that
we know them our best explanations this
is why explanations need to be at the
center of our concern about rationally
understanding the world and having
rational discussions and writing popular
science books now finally I'm just going
to skip way back to earlier in the book
earlier in our mathematical Universe
where he mentions Papa once and as you
can guess as we always say here whenever
I pick up a popular science book
whenever I listen to a podcast whenever
I tune into a YouTube explainer video
and car popper comes up it comes up in
the same way
and it comes up in such a way that it's
a misconception it came up during their
conversation let's see what Max has to
say in the book itself because it comes
to bear on what he thinks about
testability now he doesn't even think as
I think many others have said before I
think Sean carroller said even though
these guys ostensibly endorsed the
Multiverse the many worlds
interpretation everettian quantum theory
they don't they don't think it can be
testable well tegmark goes the max goes
even further he doesn't think that it
needs to be testable he doesn't think
not only does he not think it is
testable he doesn't think it needs to be
testable or should be testable because
he doesn't think multiversars in general
need to be testable and he says this
because he claims multiverses are not
theories in the first place
and Papa he says he claims when talking
about testability was only talking about
the testability of theories not
predictions and the Multiverse he says
is a prediction from a theory
now that's very cute but it's completely
wrong but let me just read from page 346
of his book and he says quote let's be
more specific the influential
austro-british philosopher Karl Popper
popularized that our widely accepted
adage quote if it's not falsifiable then
it's not scientific end quote and he
goes on to say physics is all about
testing mathematical theories against
observation if a theory can't be tested
even in principle then it's logically
impossible to ever falsify it which by
Papa's definition means that it's
unscientific it follows then that the
only thing that can have any hope of
being scientific is a theory which
brings us to a very important Point
parallel universes are not a theory but
a prediction of certain theories end
quote
well look it's true to say that the
claim of anything like X exists is not
falsifiable and Max uses the existence
of a banana to point this out also just
after this he goes on to say quote
parallel universes if they exist are
things
and things can't be scientific so a
parallel universe can't be scientific
any more than a banana can end quote
I don't know what that means
anyone who claims bananas do not exist
has a falsifiable claim
so he's completely confused about that
and he's confused because he does not
understand the Criterion and he doesn't
understand the Criterion because he
hasn't read papa is my guess or if he
has he's misread him I mean Papa wrote
whole books many of them explaining his
stuff it's a whole thing it's not just
quote if it's not falsifiable then it's
not scientific end quote but you know as
I say this is what passes for papyrian
epistemology in some places
if someone says
bananas don't exist pull out a banana
and go there you go it's a banana
you've falsified their claim well there
are no bananas in this room pull out the
banana if they if they still deny it
well then you're in the presence of an
irrational person that's how
falsification works the thing is one
better way of understanding popper on
this point about testability or
falsifiability or theories and
predictions or whatever it's just to
begin with the Assumption what we're
doing is conjecturing we're guessing
it's reality we're interpreting stuff
and then on that basis
theories and predictions are conjectures
they're all conjectures it's all
conjectural it can all be tested of
course the predictions can be tested of
course the predictions can be falsified
gain said shown to be false shown to be
wrong refuted there they're a way of
interpreting a consequence of a
particular Theory David Deutsch actually
describes and in my Multiverse series I
spend some time explaining the way in
which he would set up an experiment a
possible experiment to distinguish the
motive so-called Multiverse
interpretation the Multiverse Theory as
compared to collapse models right
they're the standard Copenhagen
interpretation this idea that the wave
function collapses or some such that
there aren't multiple universes okay
there is such an explanation that can be
done I don't want to go through it right
now but it will involve an AGI one day
the the future existence of an AGI able
to perform an interference experiment in
its own brain okay this this sort of
thing could be done but but also any
test of quantum theory is a test of the
Multiverse because they are one and the
same thing and that's what we should be
saying if we're going to properly
explain these things so even the
Defenders of Multiverse Theory are not
doing themselves a favor by claiming in
some way shape or form these things
aren't testable they are they are this
is why papyrian epistemology is
important this is why having a coherent
worldview as I say is important why
having an understanding of how the
philosophy gives you a certain kind of
epistemology and epistemology tells you
about the limits of knowledge what can
be known in the way in which it works
certainty and uncertainty it tells you
about mathematics and why mathematics
although it's about necessary truth it
doesn't allow you to access certainty an
app and the absolute truth of anything
it doesn't put hierarchies there in
place between Science and Mathematics it
also doesn't allow you to know the
ultimate nature of reality and also
tells you why that's not even desirable
because we want progress and we want
optimism and this idea that there is an
end point in some way shape or form to
our understanding this ultimate nature
of reality is a depressing thought it
also means that you end up with dogmas
and doctrines and the idea that the
truth is Manifest ends up leading to
tyranny so we've got a connection there
with morality and politics it's all
encompassing this this is why we like to
explain the world view that's in the
beginning of infinity and the fabric of
reality and elsewhere it provides you
with this it's like we're not just
saying it has all the answers but it has
some sort of coherent framework which
allows you not to make what I regard as
clangers of logically inconsistent
claims and
pseudo-scientific religious metaphysical
claims as well
none of this is to say that overall this
is what Max is doing he's not okay the
the overwhelming majority of the book is
good but I think it's just undermined by
not having a deeper understanding of
philosophy and epistemology you can't do
away with these things and I think a
philosopher should ignore physics the
most important sorts of physics things
like consequences of quantum theory I
think that's just really important to do
mathematicians shouldn't ignore it as
well none of them should ignore
epistemology anyone who's versed in
epistemology should have some
understanding of science it's not to say
one needs to be an expert in all of
these things it's just helpful it helps
to make progress in any one of these
areas if you're an expert in one of them
by knowing a little bit of the rest it
helps everyone just to know a little bit
but that's the Multiverse according to
Max tegma called the multiverses
according to Max tegmark next time we're
going to be talking about minds and I'm
going to pick it up where at the end of
this conversation they talk a little bit
about AGI Ai and then the next
conversation that they have is entirely
devoted to AGI and they're basically in
Furious agreement about things and about
the dangers the potential dangers of AGI
and just not really understanding that
AGI would be a mind like ours able to
universally explain stuff like we can to
be creative like we can instead of
course they make that era of well it
might just have different goals and it
would disregard us it'll have worse
morality all this sort of stuff
so we'll leave that until next time and
until then bye-bye